In this section, I'm going to talk
about smoothing maxent models.
Just like for other models we
build in natural image processing,
we still have the issue that
these models can over fit and
that we want to apply
smoothing techniques.
So that the parameters we
estimate don't lead to
two spiky distributions that over fit
what was observed in the training data.
This topic of smoothing maximum entry
models is often also described as using
a prior distribution for the parameters or
doing regularization of the models.
The issue of smoothing is very
prominent in the models we build
Because the models we build have lots and
lots of features.
Typically when you do logistic
regression in a statistics class,
your model might only have four,
eight, 12 features.
And there's enough data that
you can suitably estimate
the parameters of all those features.
But typically, the models we'll
build in natural language processing
will have hundreds of thousands, millions,
even tens of millions of features.
And so, one thing to notice
right there is simply storing
the array of parameter values will
have a substantial memory cost.
But from a statistical estimation
point of view, more importantly,
that most of the parameters of those
features will be very poorly estimated
because we'll have very limited data in
which to estimate the parameter values.
So there are lots of issues of sparsity.
Overfitting to the training data is very
easy md we need smoothing to prevent it.
And many features that we saw, happen
to see at training time some example.
We might never see at all.
Again and further, you set the model
at test time, so you want to not
give too much weight to features
we happen to see at training time.
There are other reasons why we
need to smooth our maxent models.
If we don't, feature weights can be
infinite, and the iterative solvers we use
to set parameter values can take a long
time to get to those infinities.
So really we want to change
the model formulation, so
the optimal feature weights are finite,
and
therefore easily found and
findable by an optimization procedure.
Let me motivate this issue of smoothing,
by looking at a really simple example.
Let's assume we're tossing a coin, and
we have a distribution of heads and tails.
The natural way that
that's formulated with
features that the kind we've talked about.
Is we have two features one for
is it a head and one for is it a tail?
And then we'll have the following
model distribution.
So this is the probability of heads
where we have the feature weight for
it being a head, and the probability of it
being tails with the feature weight for
it being tails.
And then this is our normalization term,
which is the same in both cases.
Now that makes it look like
there are two parameters,
but there are really only
one degree of freedom here.
And this piece of math here shows how this
max head formulation connects
to the normal formulation.
You see a two class logistic progression
in the statistics text book.
So, if we instead said what really matters
is the difference between the weight
of the head and tail parameter.
Then we can say that the probability of
heads can instead be written like this.
So what we're doing here is we've
just taken this equation up here and
we've multiplied each term by,
this are the minus.
And then we simplified
that math down a little,
we get e to the e to
the land rover plus one.
And then, the probability of tails,
doing the same kind of trickery,
comes out as e to the zero
over e to the lambda + 0.
And again, if we simplify that down,
that's then 1 over e to the lambda + 1.
And so this is the simple
form that you often see for
a logistic progression model.
In the general, that's true, right?
That what's important is the difference
of the weights of opposing parameters
when you have a multi,
two class or multi-class model.
Okay, so then, if we graph lambda.
We get this classic logistic curve.
So, with the weight of zero, you would
get a half each chance of heads or
tails, and
as the weight goes into negative,
the probability drops down initially
sharply, and then very slowly.
And as the lambda becomes positive,
the probability climbs initially.
Quickly and then very slowly.
Well let's assume that we've seen
just a little bit of data and
we estimate lambda, so as to maximize
the likelihood of the observed data.
So then the probability
of the observed data
is the number of heads times the log
of the probability of heads.
This is the log likelihood
of the observed data.
Plus the number of tails times the log
likelihood of the probability of tails.
And using the form on the previous slide,
that comes out like this.
Okay, suppose we toss two heads and
two tails, then not surprisingly.
The optimum value of lambda
comes out as zero, and
that corresponds with a probability
of heads or tails as a half.
If we toss three heads and one tail
then the optimum value for the lambda
parameter comes out positive because
there's about a three quarters chance of
a head and it comes out just about there.
The problem is suppose in our training
data we saw four heads and no tails.
Well, what that means is we
have a categorical distribution
in the observed data.
There are no tails and
that means the bigger Lambda gets
the higher the conditional log
likelihood of the observed data is.
Because a lambda value of
positive infinity corresponds to
a categorical distribution where
the probability of head is 1 and
the probability of tails equals 0.
And that's immediately problematic for
both of the reasons that
were mentioned earlier.
Firstly, we don't want to
estimate categorical models
where the certain feature appears, we say
that there's a probability of one of some
outcome, we want to have smoothing
because normally our data is sparse.
But also if we're asking our
optimization procedure to optimize
something were the optimum
value is an infinite value for
parameter, that's going to be difficult
for the optimization procedure.
So there's several ways that this
problem has been dealt with,
from alimentary models.
And I will mention several
of them while concentrating
on the use of a prior distribution,
which is the usual used method these days.
So, in a 4/0 case,
there were two problems.
So the first problem was the optimal value
of land, that was infinity, which is
a long trip for an optimization procedure
to find the optimal value of a parameter.
And indeed it kind of can't, it can just
move it out and out to a large number.
The second problem is that
we've got no smoothing,
our loan distribution is going to be
just a spite as the empirical one.
And again, this is going to commonly
happen without N or P features,
because we're going to throw
a million features into the model.
And it's just going to turn out that
we're going to say words beginning
with GHO well, we only saw two of
them in the training day there,
and in both cases the word
was a person's name.
Therefore, we're going to say any time
we see something that starts with GHO it
has to be a person name, but
it might turn out that in future data
that's not necessarily the case.
It might be an organization name, a place
name, or maybe even a word that just
starts with GHO, like ghoul,
which isn't a proper name at all.
So how can we solve this problem?
One crude way to solve this problem is
just to stop the optimization early.
So we can run an intricate solver and
say let's just run it between
iterations and stop wherever we are.
So if we do that the value of
lamba will definitely be finite or
have grown fairly large.
And the optimization won't
run an infinite loop.
And so this was commonly
used in early maxent work.
So the idea is we, over here,
stop the optimization procedure.
We're tracking the likelihood up,
making lambda bigger.
But we simply stop after a few iterations.
And so, for example, we might stop
when the value of lambda is 5.
And the end result of that is that
the probability distribution,
the lambda equals five might be something
like a 99% chance of a head and
a 1% chance of a tail, and
we have satisfied this goal of
smoothing the distribution slightly.
So it's no longer categorical and
having a optimization procedure
run in a finite amount of time.
But here's a better way of achieving
that goal and that's to do what's
referred to as using a prior
distribution and so when we do this
we talk about using MAP estimation which
stands for maxima a posteriori estimation.
And the idea of that is we suppose
we have a prior expectation
that parameter values
shouldn't be very large.
More strongly,
we can say that our prior expectation
is that most features are relevant
to the classification and so
our prior expectations that
feature waits are zero.
And then, if we see evidence that they're
useful features we'll gradually increase
the weights of the parameters.
And so we can imbalance the evidence from
the observed data without prior beliefs.
The evidence will never totally
defeat the prior and so
parameters will be smoothed and
kept finite.
And so we can do this by explicitly
changing the optimization objective,
to maximum posteriro likelihood, and
so that's what we have down here.
So now we're going to have a penalized
log likeli hood of condition,
a penalized conditional log likelihood
of the observed data, which is going to
be the sum of the prior probability
of the parameter weights, plus
the previous conditional log likelihood of
the observed data, which is the evidence.
The most common way to do this
in practice is to the Gaussian,
which are also known as quadratic or
L 2 priors.
So our formalization here is to say that,
let's assume our prior belief is that
each parameter will be distributed
according to a Gaussian with mean mu and
variant sigma squared.
And so then the probability of
the parameter having different values
is being given by this equation for
the normal curve.
And the reason why we will soon see why
this is also referred to as quadratic or
L2 priors is this term ends
up not really mattering and
the important part is this bit in here.
Where we're getting the square distance
of the parameter value from the mean.
So parameters are penalized for
their value drifting far from the mean.
And in practice usually we
take this mean to be zero
which is saying the feature is
irrelevant to the classification.
Zero weight features have no
influence on the classification.
There's this extra parameter down here,
hyperparameter, as to
how big is the variance.
And this is going to control easy it is
for the parameter to move away from zero.
If the variance is very small,
the optimization will keep the parameter
values cluster close to zero.
If the variance is very weak they'll
be allowed to walk farther away.
As a starting off point
of building models,
just taking 2 sigma squared,
to equal 1, commonly works rather well.
You can play with this value.
Commonly what you'll find, for the kind of
sparsely evidence many feature models that
we build, that making sigma much smaller
than 1, quickly becomes problematic.
But you can make sigma,
two sigma squared quite a bit larger and
commonly you can have it sort of
somewhere in the range between half and
a thousand and
the models will work fairly well.
And so here's a graph over here that
sort of shows you the optimization
happens once you've got
a regularization term.
So we have exactly the same four
to zero distribution of heads and
tails and then we set
the regularization differently.
So if you take two sigma
squared equal to one,
which is fairly strong regularization.
The maximum is positive so
it's going to say you're more
likely to get a head than a tail.
But it's still going to be something
like two thirds head one thirds tail.
If you take 2 sigma squared equal to 10,
then the regularization is weaker,
and so the value of lambda is
going to come out at about two.
And so that's going to say about 95%
chance of a head and 5% chance of a tail.
Making the two sigma squared
infinite is equivalent to having
no regularization at all for
this leads us back to our previous model,
and then the optimal value of
the parameter is infinite.
So if we use Gaussian priors,
we're putting in a trade off between
expectation-matching versus
smaller parameter values.
What this means in practice is
that when multiple features can be
recruited to explain
a certain observation,
it's the more common ones that
will receive the most weight.
So the way to think about this is to
think that in the model formulation,
that you pay the penalty for
having a non zero parameter weight just
once whereas you can gain from having
a non-zero parameter weight for
every data item for which that feature and
its parameter weight will be useful.
And so therefore a feature that can be
useful a lot of times in explaining data
items will be allowed to have a high
weight because the prior is basically
overwhelmed, whereas a feature that can
only help in explaining a very small
number of observations will have its
weight greatly constrained by the prior.
And the other good thing to know
about having Gaussian priors is
putting them in will improve the accuracy
of your classifier, as we'll see.
Let me just now go very concretely
through what happens in
the equations that you have
to use when you have a prior.
So we're now going to use this
penalized conditional log likelihood.
And so as well as this term from before,
we're adding in this term for the prior.
And so what is that term for the prior?
It's the log of the normal distribution
over the parameter weights.
So if we then go back and
look at this equation here,
we then have to take the log of this,
and so
we're going to have effectively out here.
This is just a constant, and then we're
going to be taking the log of an X and
that will go away and
be an identity function.
So what we end up with here
is that we're subtracting
this term here, where the K over
here is the log of the constant.
Which we can ignore for the maximization
of the penalized conditional likelihood.
And so, what we're actually working
out here is this squared term
that is how far are the parameter values
away from the mean of the distribution.
And that term is then being
scaled by this 2 sigma squared so
you should be able to see that
how big you make 2 sigma squared
sort of balances the trade
off between these two turns.
And then for
the derivative of the conditional
penalized conditional log likelihood
we're taking the derivative of this.
Which is the pop that we saw before,
which is
the different between that actual weight
and the predicted weight of the feature.
And then we're subtracting
off the derivative of this.
And so
that's just an easy quadratic form, so
the derivative of that is just over here.
And so what we're then going to say is to
make this zero that our predicted weight.
The predicted expectation of some feature
being true is going to be a little bit
less than its actual expectation because
it's being penalized by this amount here.
To simplify things down one step further,
in practice we almost
always take the mean out our
prior distribution to be zero
since the position of least committment
is to ensure the features are.
So then those equations simplify
down one time further and
we just get the results shown here
where we just have the lambdas.
And so,
it's just how big the lambdas are and
their distance away from 0 that's
determining what we're using.
Let me go back to the example
of making a maximum entropy
named entity recognition model
that I've shown you before.
Actually, when I was
showing the sides before,
I was leaving out a detail
because the parameter weights.
This model we're actually estimated in
a model that used calcium prior smoothing.
And now that we understand
a bit more about that,
we can see the effect of that in the
estimation of the parameters of the model.
So here we have two features and
this feature is a conjunction feature.
The present tag is proper noun and
the previous tag is preposition.
So this feature is necessarily going to be
much less evidence in the training data
than this feature which is just that the
current part of speech is a proper noun.
So the general expectation is that
higher weight should be given
to the more common features if they
carry as much predictive information.
And that's what we see here, that you have
the high weight given to
the more general feature and
much smaller weight is given
to the more specific feature.
That is because even though there is some
further evidence from this conjunction
feature here.
The fact of the matter is you're
quite likely to have a named entity
when the part of speech is a proper noun.
And so most of the weight is going
to the more general features here.
And we also see the same
effect in some of the other
feature classes that we
talked about before.
So, for the two above it, the current
word being grace is a fairly specific and
rarely evident feature,
whereas the fact that the word begins.
Where the capital letter G is
a much more general feature.
And so, that we're seeing most of
the weight for this being good evidence
that it's a person rather than a location
going to this much more general feature.
And if we look down further below,
you can maybe see other cases
of the same thing happening.
But you should also realize that
when there is a lot of extra
information from a feature conjunction,
then that feature conjunction
will get a lot of weight still.
And we saw an example of that
with these two cases here.
So that we discussed how, since most
tokens should be classified as not
an entity that if you just simply know
that the previous word was not an entity.
Most likely the next node is
not an entity as well and so
you get this highly negative weight for
both entity classes.
But if you know that the previous
word was not an entity, but
you also know that the current
word is capitalized.
Then in that case there's strong
evidence that you should classify
things differently, and so this
feature does get a significant weight.
Even though its conjunction feature that
involves this other previous feature.
You just get a kind of a lot of evidence
from knowing that conjunction is true.
Okay here's an example showing the effects
of using a Gaussian smoothing for
estimating a maximum entropy model.
And this is an example from
learning a part of speech tagger
from the work of Christina Toutanova and
me and others at Stanford.
Okay, and
this example shows the typical effects of
what happens with smooth
versus unsmooth models.
So what we find is that, so we've trained
both models for
up to 360 iterations up here.
One thing we find that's
just good to know and
this is looking at
accuracy on test data that
the model with smoothing performs a lot
better than the model without smoothing.
Okay, that's about 0.6
of a percent better, but
part of speech tagging
generally is highly accurate.
And so it's better off thinking
of this as error reduction, so
if you're reducing the error
rate from 3.5% down to 2.9%,
that's actually quite
a large error reduction.
Okay, but
we can see a bit more than just that.
So you should see here that for the model
with no smoothing, it shows this very
typical pattern that you used to observe
for the training of max int models.
That as you train the model,
initially the accuracy
improves strongly up to a peak And
then it starts to decline.
So this is where you see the over fitting
of the model to the train of data
in a way that actually means
it does worse at test time.
And so
common practice was to stop training of
the max-end models at
around iteration 100.
This is sort of being a little bit
unfair to what normally happened
without smoothing.
If you did early stopping that you'd
be getting inaccuracy of something
like 96.87.
Nevertheless, that's still well less
than the accuracy of the smooth model.
On the other hand, if you have a smooth
model, that the smooth model's likelihood
just nicely increases until it converges,
and optimization stops.
Giving us this performance here.
There's actually a second effect
that's very interesting as if we focus
in on particular on the performance
of the model on unknown words.
Now unknown words The part-of-speech
tag distribution is
being estimated by using special
features that generalize over
words such as what letters do
they begin with and end with.
But nevertheless a lot of those
features are themselves pretty sparse.
And so, what we find is that
the model without smoothing
especially over fits and
tends to do badly on the unknown
words where the model with smoothing
is 23% better here on the unknown word.
So that's a very significant increase.
And very helpful to applications.
because performance on words
that the model wasn't trained on
is especially important to the good
performance of applications.
So smoothing is just good.
It softens distributions, it pushes the
weight onto more explanatory features, it
allows you to dump more and more features
into the model without a lot of problems.
And at least if you don't
do at least stopping,
it speeds up the convergence
of your models.
Let me just give one terminology note.
I'm talking of priors and
maximal posterior estimation is
language from Bayesian statistics.
In frequentist statistics, people will
instead talk about using regularization of
XMD models, in particular Gaussian
priors called L2 regularization.
I'm not really going to get into that, all
you really need to know is that the math
comes out the same it doesn't
matter what name you choose.
Let me just then quickly mention
two other ways of doing smoothing.
Another way of thinking about smoothing
is to smooth the data not the parameters.
And we saw that earlier when
talking about language models.
So, if the distribution we actually
saw was four heads and zero tails.
We can then smooth that by
doing add-one smoothing say.
And say we got five heads and one tail.
And well then we've solved our problem.
Because if we then do maximum
conditional likelihood estimation
that we're setting the value of
the parameter to something like 1.2.
And it's got a finite value and
we don't have a problem.
That works fine for
a very simple example like this.
The reason that that's not practical for
models with millions of parameters
is it becomes almost impossible to
know how to create artificial data.
In such a way, that every,
parameter, hasn't gone zero value,
without, creating,
a normal amount of artificial data,
so the amount of artificial data
overwhelm the amount of real data.
A final thing that's commonly done in
NLP models is to use count
cutoffs with features.
So the idea there is to calculate features
for each data item in your model.
And then you look at the features and
what their empirical support
in the training data is.
Then you simply say something like, okay
for any feature that was observed three
times or less in the training data, I'm
just going to dump it from my model, and
estimate the model over
the remaining features.
In the discussion of smoothing, this is
a weak and indirect smoothing method.
So effectively what it's doing,
is saying we're going to estimate
the weight of all rare features as zero.
Which you can also think of a signing
their Gaussian prior with zero variance,
and mean zero, so that their weights
can never move away from zero.
So dropping low counts does remove
the features which are most in need of
smoothing.
And it does speed up estimation of
the model by reducing the model size.
But it's a very crude method
of doing smoothing, and
so the message I'd like to give is count
cutoffs generally hurt accuracy in
the presence of proper smoothing.
A lot of people got into
the habit of using count cutoffs
in the days before regularized models
because in those cases, it would usually
helped to use count cutoffs because you
got less overfitting of your model.
But with proper smoothing, you shouldn't
need to use count cutoffs to get the best
possible model, that doesn't mean that
there's no reason to use count cutoffs.
The most common reason to use
count cutoffs in practice
is because you want to shrink
the size of your model.
That ten million parameters take
a lot of memory to store and
you might prefer to build a model
that only has 300,000 parameters and
then obviously what you want to do
is keep the most useful features.
Which will be normally basically
the ones that have significant
frequency of occurrence in the data.
Okay, so that's the end of this session
on smoothing or priors for maxent models.
In this section we've only talked
about use of Gaussian or L2 priors.
And in recent work there has been quite
a bit of discussion of using other priors,
in particular there's
common use of L1 priors,
which is a different way of cutting down
the number of features in your model.
You may have seen that if you've seen
other things like machine learning.
But I'm not going to discuss
that in these classes.